+++
## Provide a canonical URL if mirroring an OJS instance
##canonicalurl = ""

title = "Have we reproduced Rat Park? Conceptual but not direct replication of the protective effects of social and environmental enrichment in addiction"

## Provide the article type and the ordering of its type in the contents page
articleType = "Review"
articleType_weight = "4"

# Provide author details
authors = [
  {surname = "Khoo",  given_name = "Shaun Yon-Seng", affiliations = ["1"],  ORCID = "0000-0002-0972-3788", corresp = "shaun.khoo@umontreal.ca", equalcontrib = "no", deceased = "no", creditroles = [""]}
]

affiliations = [{ISNI = "0000 0001 2292 3357", ROR = "0161xgx34", name = "Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada"}]

#funding = [{fundref = "10.xxxx/xxxx", funder = "fundername", awardid = "" }]

history = [{event = "submission", date = ""},
{event = "revisionrequest", date = ""},
{event = "revisionreceived", date = ""},
{event = "accept", date = ""},
]

date = "2020-08-13"
modifieddate = "2020-08-13"

## Details like volume and issue cascade from the issue metadata. Language will cascade from site metadata.

articleID = "1318"
DOI = "10.31885/jrn.1.2020.1318"
volume = "1"
# issue = ""
firstpage = "1318"
lastpage = ""
#language = ""
keywords = ["Rat Park", "Addiction", "Environment", "Social", "Enrichment", "Housing"]


PDF = "jrn.1.2020.1318.pdf"
PDFcanonical = ""
XML = ""
XMLcanonical = ""
HTML = ""
HTMLcanonical = ""
EPUB = ""
EPUBcanonical = ""
customGalleys = [{ galleyname = "", galleyURL = "", galleycanonical = ""}]
supplementaryFiles = [{ supplementURL = "jrn.1.2020.1318-reviews.pdf", supplementName = "Reviewer's Comments"}]

outputs = ["html", "galleyPDF"]

license = "https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0"

abstract = "The Rat Park studies are classic experiments in addiction neuroscience, yet they have not been successfully replicated directly and several serious methodological criticisms have been raised. However, the conceptual reproducibility of the Rat Park studies is supported by both contemporaneous and subsequent research. Contemporaneous research on social and environmental enrichment frequently found social isolation rendered rats less sensitive to the effects of drugs of abuse. The Rat Park studies therefore confirmed the importance of social and environmental enrichment and extended this literature to suggest that enrichment reduced opioid consumption. Subsequent studies have also demonstrated social and environmental enrichment reduces drug consumption. However, there are also several papers reporting no effects of enrichment (or ‘negative’ results) and caveats from studies that show genes, age, sex and drug of abuse are all important parameters. While the Rat Park studies did not use methods that are reliable by current standards, enrichment has been shown to reliably reduce opioid consumption and this effect can generalise to other drugs of abuse."

relations = [
  {linktype = "", contenttype = "", sourcetype = "repository", objectidtype = "doi", objectid = "", link = "https://", source = "", articletitle = ""},
#  {linktype = "", contenttype = "", sourcetype = "repository", objectidtype = "doi", objectid = "", link = "https://", source = "", datatitle = ""},
]

## Social media details for if the paper has a social media cover image or if authors have a twitter handle.
socialimage = ""
socialimagealt = ""
twitterhandle = ""

references = ["Gage SH, Sumnall HR. Rat Park: How a rat paradise changed the narrative of addiction. Addiction. 2019;114(5):917-22.",
"Alexander BK, Coambs RB, Hadaway PF. The effect of housing and gender on morphine self-administration in rats. Psychopharmacology. 1978;58(2):175-9.",
"Coambs RB, Alexander BK, Davis CM, Hadaway PF, Tressel WR. A drug dispenser to measure individual drinking in rat colonies. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1980;13(4):593-5.",
"Alexander BK, Beyerstein BL, Hadaway PF, Coambs RB. Effect of early and later colony housing on oral ingestion of morphine in rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1981;15(4):571-6.",
"Hadaway PF, Alexander BK, Coambs RB, Beyerstein B. The effect of housing and gender on preference for morphine-sucrose solutions in rats. Psychopharmacology. 1979;66(1):87-91.",
"Alexander BK, Hadaway PF. Opiate addiction: The case for an adaptive orientation. Psychological Bulletin. 1982;92(2):367-81.",
"Heirene R. A call for replications of addiction research: Which studies should we replicate & what constitutes a “successful” replication? PsyArXiV Preprints. 2020.",
"Petrie BF. Environment is not the most important variable in determining oral morphine consumption in Wistar rats. Psychological Reports. 1996;78(2):391-400.",
"Simons DJ. The value of direct replication. Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2014;9(1):76-80.",
"Stroebe W, Strack F. The alleged crisis and the illusion of exact replication. Perspectives on Psychological Science. 2014;9(1):59-71.",
"Nosek BA, Errington TM. What is replication? PLOS Biology. 2020;18(3):e3000691.",
"Fuentes VO, Hunt WB, Crossland J. The production of morphine tolerance and physical dependence by the oral route in the rat. Psychopharmacology. 1978;59(1):65-9.",
"Hill SY, Powell BJ. Cocaine and morphine self-administration: Effects of differential rearing. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1976;5(6):701-4.",
"Rushton R, Steinberg H. Reactions to drugs influenced by early experience. Animal Behaviour. 1966;14(4):585.",
"Welch BL, Welch AS, Adams JG, Garriss KB, Piland J, Eskay R, et al. Graded effect of social stimulation upon d-amphetamine toxicity, aggressiveness and heart and adrenal weight. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. 1966;151(3):331-8.",
"Katz DM, Steinberg H. Long-term isolation in rats reduces morphine response. Nature. 1970;228(5270):469-71.",
"Baumel I, DeFeo JJ, Lal H. Decreased potency of CNS depressants after prolonged social isolation in mice. Psychopharmacologia. 1969;15(2):153-8.",
"Kazmaier K, Butcher RE, Senter RJ, Stutz RM. Rearing conditions and ethanol consumption by rats. Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 1973;34(2):520-4.",
"Bardo MT, Rowlett JK, Harris MJ. Conditioned place preference using opiate and stimulant drugs: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. 1995;19(1):39-51.",
"Schenk S, Hunt T, Colle L, Amit Z. Isolation versus grouped housing in rats: differential effects of low doses of heroin in the place preference paradigm. Life Sciences. 1983;32(10):1129-34.",
"Schenk S, Ellison F, Hunt T, Amit Z. An examination of heroin conditioning in preferred and nonpreferred environments and in differentially housed mature and immature rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1985;22(2):215-20.",
"El Rawas R, Thiriet N, Lardeux V, Jaber M, Solinas M. Environmental enrichment decreases the rewarding but not the activating effects of heroin. Psychopharmacology. 2009;203(3):561-70.",
"Schenk S, Hunt T, Klukowski G, Amit Z. Isolation housing decreases the effectiveness of morphine in the conditioned taste aversion paradigm. Psychopharmacology. 1987;92(1):48-51.",
"Smith JK, Neill JC, Costall B. The influence of postweaning housing conditions on drug-induced conditioned taste aversion. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1998;59(2):379-86.",
"Schenk S, Hunt T, Malovechko R, Robertson A, Klukowski G, Amit Z. Differential effects of isolation housing on the conditioned place preference produced by cocaine and amphetamine. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1986;24(6):1793-6.",
"Lespine L-F, Tirelli E. No evidence that wheel-running exercise impacts cocaine conditioned place preference in male C57BL/6J mice. Behavioural Brain Research. 2019;365:110-3.",
"Zakharova E, Miller J, Unterwald E, Wade D, Izenwasser S. Social and physical environment alter cocaine conditioned place preference and dopaminergic markers in adolescent male rats. Neuroscience. 2009;163(3):890-7.",
"Chauvet C, Lardeux V, Jaber M, Solinas M. Brain regions associated with the reversal of cocaine conditioned place preference by environmental enrichment. Neuroscience. 2011;184:88-96.",
"Solinas M, Thiriet N, Rawas RE, Lardeux V, Jaber M. Environmental enrichment during early stages of life reduces the behavioral, neurochemical, and molecular effects of cocaine. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34(5):1102-11.",
"Freese L, Almeida FB, Heidrich N, Hansen AW, Steffens L, Steinmetz A, et al. Environmental enrichment reduces cocaine neurotoxicity during cocaine-conditioned place preference in male rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 2018;169:10-5.",
"Ribeiro Do Couto B, Aguilar MA, Lluch J, Rodríguez-Arias M, Miñarro J. Social experiences affect reinstatement of cocaine-induced place preference in mice. Psychopharmacology. 2009;207(3):485-98.",
"Solinas M, Chauvet C, Thiriet N, El Rawas R, Jaber M. Reversal of cocaine addiction by environmental enrichment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008;105(44):17145-50.",
"Wongwitdecha N, Marsden CA. Isolation rearing prevents the reinforcing properties of amphetamine in a conditioned place preference paradigm. European Journal of Pharmacology. 1995;279(1):99-103.",
"Yates JR, Beckmann JS, Meyer AC, Bardo MT. Concurrent choice for social interaction and amphetamine using conditioned place preference in rats: Effects of age and housing condition. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 2013;129(3):240-6.",
"Thiriet N, Gennequin B, Lardeux V, Chauvet C, Decressac M, Janet T, et al. Environmental enrichment does not reduce the rewarding and neurotoxic effects of methamphetamine. Neurotox Res. 2011;19(1):172-82.",
"Bozarth MA, Murray A, Wise RA. Influence of housing conditions on the acquisition of intravenous heroin and cocaine self-administration in rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1989;33(4):903-7.",
"Hofford RS, Chow JJ, Beckmann JS, Bardo MT. Effects of environmental enrichment on self-administration of the short-acting opioid remifentanil in male rats. Psychopharmacology. 2017;234(23):3499-506.",
"Imperio CG, McFalls AJ, Hadad N, Blanco-Berdugo L, Masser DR, Colechio EM, et al. Exposure to environmental enrichment attenuates addiction-like behavior and alters molecular effects of heroin self-administration in rats. Neuropharmacology. 2018;139:26-40.",
"Boyle AE, Gill K, Smith BR, Amit Z. Differential effects of an early housing manipulation on cocaine-induced activity and self-administration in laboratory rats. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1991;39(2):269-74.",
"van der Veen R, Piazza PV, Deroche-Gamonet V. Gene–environment interactions in vulnerability to cocaine intravenous self-administration: a brief social experience affects intake in DBA/2J but not in C57BL/6J mice. Psychopharmacology. 2007;193(2):179-86.",
"Westenbroek C, Perry AN, Becker JB. Pair housing differentially affects motivation to self-administer cocaine in male and female rats. Behavioural Brain Research. 2013;252:68-71.",
"Schenk S, Robinson B, Amit Z. Housing conditions fail to affect the intravenous self-administration of amphetamine. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior. 1988;31(1):59-62.",
"Puhl MD, Blum JS, Acosta-Torres S, Grigson PS. Environmental enrichment protects against the acquisition of cocaine self-administration in adult male rats, but does not eliminate avoidance of a drug-associated saccharin cue. Behavioural Pharmacology. 2012;23(1):43-53.",
"Gauthier JM, Lin A, Nic Dhonnchadha BÁ, Spealman RD, Man H-Y, Kantak KM. Environmental enrichment facilitates cocaine-cue extinction, deters reacquisition of cocaine self-administration and alters AMPAR GluA1 expression and phosphorylation. Addiction Biology. 2017;22(1):152-62.",
"Thiel KJ, Sanabria F, Pentkowski NS, Neisewander JL. Anti-craving effects of environmental enrichment. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;12(9):1151-6.",
"Chauvet C, Lardeux V, Goldberg SR, Jaber M, Solinas M. Environmental enrichment reduces cocaine seeking and reinstatement induced by cues and stress but not by cocaine. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34(13):2767-78.",
"Cantin L, Lenoir M, Augier E, Vanhille N, Dubreucq S, Serre F, et al. Cocaine is low on the value ladder of rats: Possible evidence for resilience to addiction. PLoS ONE. 2010;5(7):e11592.",
"Huynh C, Fam J, Ahmed SH, Clemens KJ. Rats quit nicotine for a sweet reward following an extensive history of nicotine use. Addiction Biology. 2015;22(1):142-51.",
"Lenoir M, Cantin L, Vanhille N, Serre F, Ahmed SH. Extended heroin access increases heroin choices over a potent nondrug alternative. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013;38(7):1209-20.",
"Madsen HB, Ahmed SH. Drug versus sweet reward: greater attraction to and preference for sweet versus drug cues. Addiction Biology. 2015;20(3):433-44.",
"Ahmed SH, Lenoir M, Guillem K. Neurobiology of addiction versus drug use driven by lack of choice. Current Opinion in Neurobiology. 2013;23(4):581-7.",
"Newman EL, Leonard MZ, Arena DT, de Almeida RMM, Miczek KA. Social defeat stress and escalation of cocaine and alcohol consumption: Focus on CRF. Neurobiology of Stress. 2018;9:151-65.",
"Venniro M, Shaham Y. An operant social self-administration and choice model in rats. Nature Protocols. 2020.",
"Venniro M, Russell TI, Ramsey LA, Richie CT, Lesscher HMB, Giovanetti SM, et al. Abstinence-dependent dissociable central amygdala microcircuits control drug craving. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2020:202001615.",
"Venniro M, Russell TI, Zhang M, Shaham Y. Operant social reward decreases incubation of heroin craving in male and female rats. Biological Psychiatry. 2019;86(11):848-56.",
"Venniro M, Zhang M, Caprioli D, Hoots JK, Golden SA, Heins C, et al. Volitional social interaction prevents drug addiction in rat models. Nature Neuroscience. 2018;21(11):1520-9."]
+++

